## Definition

**Ownership means expertise. To own something at a company is to be the expert on it and its context. Ownership over a decision (or set of decisions) means that you are the expert on the context of the decision, the options considered, and the advantages and drawbacks of each. If the decision has been made already, you're responsible for knowing the option chosen and rationale behind it, and in particular for explaining the decision to people affected by it. If a decision hasn't been made or is being reevaluated, you are responsible for gathering information to make the decision well, which will become those alternatives and that rationale when the decision is made. As the expert, you will get disproportionate influence and typically unilateral authority to make decisions you own**

This short note is intended to be informational; it explains how Pachyderm works. It doesn't try to explain why this way of working is preferable to any (real or hypothetical) alternatives. I'm always happy to answer questions about it, but I want to keep it short and readable for anyone who has simply never encountered this way of working before.

## Code Ownership

At many tech companies, when you "own" a piece of the codebase, it means that others expect you to understand how it works and why it works that way[^1]. You implement its feature requests, review its PRs, and answer questions about it. Ideally, two or more people own every part of the codebase; they trust each other—or at least negotiate with each other—to make decisions, and they communicate regularly about decisions made. They can review each others' code and cover for each other during vacations and time off.

Code ownership is a special case of decision ownership. Many open-ended decisions go into a piece of code (the need to make lots of open-ended decisions fundamentally defines creative work in general). For example: what are the variables called? How is the code laid out? What's the API? Etc. When you own a piece of the codebase, you own those decisions. By extension, if you need to make changes to another part of the codebase, one of the owners of that code needs to review it. They will own the decisions in your PR, so try to accommodate their requests.

Engineers looking for more autonomy or to grow their career should look for parts of the codebase they can own. Many sections of most codebases eventually get neglected by owners too busy to pay them much attention. Those sections of code often use old libraries or contain redundant implementations. If you use the autonomy of ownership to rewrite such code (typically alongside or with guidance from the prior owner), then you'll know how it works, making you a good owner.

If you've been at Pachyderm for a while and want to lighten your load, don't be afraid to hand off code ownership to new engineers or to other teams more invested in that code. They might rewrite it and you might lose your understanding of how it works, but if you're not the owner, you're not responsible for those changes. Focusing more energy on fewer projects is a great way to increase your productivity, and productively developing high-impact projects is a great way to grow your career. Meanwhile, the old library you grudgingly maintain, which distracts you from your more ambitious projects, may be critical to someone else's grand vision. Be nice to the new owners though; they're inheriting the code's existing decisions, which you'll still understand best for a while.

## Non-Code Ownership

There are many decisions made at Pachyderm about things other than code: What features should we add next? How will they be presented to users? What's our release process?  How will we market it? Who do we hire? These, in a sense, constitute the broader creative project that is a piece of software, or even the creative project that is building a software team. Those decisions should have owners too. If you'd like to change one of them, find out who the owners are and work with them, as you would when sending a PR. Or, if you are the owner, change it!

## Ownership Ownership

Finding owners is one of the main decisions that managers make. Managers normally shouldn't make decisions whose ownership they have delegated, but it's reasonable for them to ask how a decision serves the company's goals, and if the company's goals aren't getting accomplished, it's reasonable to change the owner of those decisions in order to try a new approach.

[^1]: If you're new to code ownership: it's not-great-but-basically-fine if your code is bad for a bad reason, such as "we were in a hurry so we copied a bunch of code from another part of the codebase." Obviously such a situation isn't ideal, but it happens everywhere, and your most important job is to know about the problem! Realistically, we will write bad code from time to time for a variety of reasons, and because you know why the code is bad and how to fix it, others won't be afraid to rewrite it when they have more time, knowledge, or motivation.
